---
title: Hazard modeling, impact estimation, climate storylines for event catalogue on drought and flood disasters in the Eastern Africa
summary: Innovative disaster management techniques are essential in the face of increasing natural disasters.The E4DRR project uses event-based climate storylines for Eastern Africa to better understand and prepare for potential hazards, enhancing risk awareness and enabling effective disaster response strategies. 
date: 2024-04-01

# Featured image
# Place an image named `featured.jpg/png` in this page's folder and customize its options here.
image:
  #caption: "Image credit: [**Unsplash**](https://unsplash.com)"

authors:
  #- admin
  # - Ted

tags:
  # - Academic
#- Hugo Blox
# - Markdown
---

## Introduction:

Risk knowledge is an essential component of effective disaster risk management.
The available impact data from previous disasters serve as invaluable tools for
disaster preparedness and decisionmaking support. The project, titled "Hazard
modeling, impact estimation, climate storylines for drought and flood disasters
in Eastern Africa" in its short form "E4DRR" has been awarded funding by the
Complex Risk Analytics Fund (CRAF’d). CRAF’d aims to finance, connect, and
reimagine data to save lives especially in the context of leverage data to save
lives and enhance disaster management globally. Supported by international
partners such as the United States of America, the United Kingdom, Germany, the
Netherlands, the European Commission, and the United Nations. The project is
conducted at ICPAC with implementing partnership with NORCAP. 

The project aims to enhance the East Africa Hazard Watch Portal as a decision-making and
actionable information tool for Disaster Risk Management (DRM) and Reduction
(DRR) through impactbased forecasting based on a chain of auditable evidence
synthesised from event-based climate storylines (Figure-1). It has three main
objectives, create event-based climate storylines to impart risk knowledge and
awareness, explore the application of storylines in IBF based on EPS, and
capacity development on methods and tools used in storyline creation, such as
on EPS, hazard modelling, impact calculation, and Bayesian networks.

## Enhanced Risk Knowledge and Awareness Through the Creation of Event- Based
Climate Storylines: Climate change disasters significantly impact East Africa’s
socio-economic stability. To manage disasters effectively, it is recommended to
use climate storylines based on counterfactuals, generated by applying hazard
modeling and impact estimation on an ensemble prediction system (EPS). These
storylines provide physically self-consistent and plausible alternative
narratives of real events (Figure-2), allowing for the exploration of possible
outcomes rather than solely focusing on past disasters. They enable the
development of essential data and methods for impact-based forecasting (IBF),
anticipatory action, and loss-damage assessment.


Although the available disaster/impact database is a good starting point, it
has significant data gaps that hinder actionable insights for decision-making.
Event-based climate storylines offer coherent descriptions of specific flood or
drought events, accounting for complex interconnections among various factors.
By employing hazard and impact modeling techniques, these storylines can be
objectively generated and complemented by ensemble weather/climate predictions
to address uncertainty and explore "what if" scenarios. Through participatory
co-development and validation with stakeholders and expert knowledge, these
composite datasets become more relatable and easier to comprehend for
decision-makers and the public. The project aims to create event-based climate
storylines for floods and droughts in the 11 East African countries supported
by the EAHW system to facilitate wider dissemination and integration.

## Exploration of Storylines creation processes and applications in Ensemble Prediction System (EPS) Impact Based Forecasting (IBF)

Impact-based forecasting (IBF) improves risk communication through color-coded
risk matrices that assess risks based on probability and impact, using ensemble
prediction systems and uncertainty quantification. Hazard modeling converts
precipitation forecasts into inundation levels or drought indices, while impact
estimation integrates exposure and vulnerability data with hazard layers.
Event-based climate storylines provide impact data on past disasters,
establishing thresholds for future forecasts and facilitating risk monitoring
in anticipatory action. The generated impact undergoes risk and decision
analysis to untangle uncertainty through information modeling, representing
probabilistic relationships between socio-economic systems, factors, and expert
knowledge before releasing the IBF. This step is crucial for decision-making
and providing analytics for crisis anticipation, prevention, and response. As
these steps are part of storyline creation, the process and methods used can
potentially enhance and are essential for operational IBF in the region. The
second proposed outcome/objective of the current project focuses on leveraging
the advantages of storyline creation and derived analytical products to enhance
IBF.

## Capacity Development in the Use of Methods and Tools for Storyline Creation

The third objective focuses on capacity development in creating event-based
climate storylines through a co-development initiative built upon the Climate
Outlook Forum and other ICPAC programs, catering to the 11 IGAD member states.
The project aims to develop documentation and tutorials based on FAIR
principles (findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable geospatial data
products) and design project activities and data outcomes as standardized
Application Programming Interface(API) and Web Processing Service (WPS) for
gridded datasets, such as Analysis-Ready Cloud-Optimized (ARCO) Data Formats.
It will also explore utility of Large Language Models-based chat interface for
capacity development, particularly in chat-based support with Bayesian Networks
for risk and decision analysis on the IBF and storylines created, and
experiment with Gen AI-based EPS enhancement in bias correction and
downscaling. The project will use free and opensource software development,
primarily based on Python, and develop tutorials in Jupyter notebooks. The
third objective aims to inculcate the necessary capacity in utilizing the
methods and processes for generating event-based climate storylines, enabling
knowledge and capacity building for widespread use and sustainability of
event-based climate storylines datasets and operational IBF.


